en/part1-getting-started/chapter03-your-first-interactive-session.md, before:

# Chapter 3: Your First Interactive Session (REPL)

After successfully installing and configuring Gemini CLI, it's time to launch it and start your first AI programming conversation. This chapter will familiarize you with the core of Gemini CLI—the interactive session, also known as REPL (Read-Eval-Print Loop).

## Starting Interactive Mode

Interactive mode is the most commonly used and powerful feature of Gemini CLI. It provides a chat-like interface that allows you to have a continuous conversation with the Gemini model.

To start interactive mode, simply type the `gemini` command in your terminal:

```bash
gemini
```

After pressing Enter, you will see a welcome screen and a prompt `> ` waiting for your input. This indicates that Gemini CLI is ready to receive your instructions.

```
Welcome to Gemini CLI!

Ask me anything, or type /help for a list of commands.
> 
```

## Writing Your First Prompt

A "Prompt" is the instruction or question you give to Gemini CLI. A good prompt is key to getting a high-quality response. Let's start with a simple task.

After the `> ` prompt, type the following, and then press Enter twice (once for a new line, and once to send):

```
> Write a Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers.
```

After sending the prompt, Gemini CLI will connect to the Gemini model for processing, and you will soon see a response similar to the one below.

## Understanding Gemini CLI's Responses and Output

The response from Gemini CLI typically includes text and code generated by the AI. For our prompt above, the response might look like this:

```
Of course, here is a simple Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers:

```python
def add_numbers(a, b):
  """
  This function takes two numbers as input and returns their sum.
  """
  return a + b

# Example usage
result = add_numbers(5, 3)
print(f"The sum is: {result}")
```

This response clearly shows several key parts:
*   **Explanatory Text:** The AI first explains what it is about to do in natural language.
*   **Code Block:** The code is presented in a formatted block with syntax highlighting, making it easy to read and copy.
*   **Example:** It often includes a simple usage example to show you how to call the generated code.

## Non-Interactive Mode

Besides the interactive REPL, Gemini CLI also supports a non-interactive mode. This is useful when you want a quick answer without entering a full session, and it's also convenient for use in scripts.

You can use the `-p` (or `--prompt`) parameter along with your prompt.

```bash
gemini -p "Write a Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers."
```

After executing this command, Gemini CLI will print the response directly in the terminal and then exit, without entering interactive mode.

## Hands-on Exercise: Generating a Simple "Hello, World!" Application

Now, let's experience the power of Gemini CLI with a more practical development example. We will have it create a simple Node.js "Hello, World!" web server for us.

**Step 1: State Our Requirements**

In the Gemini CLI interactive session, enter the following prompt:

```
> I need a simple web server written in Node.js.
> It should listen for requests on port 3000.
> When a request is received, it should return "Hello, World!".
> Please put all the code in a file named `server.js`.
```

**Step 2: Review and Apply the AI-Generated Code**

Gemini CLI will understand your multi-line instructions and generate the corresponding code. It will even recognize that you want to create a file and ask for your confirmation.

```
Okay, here is the Node.js web server code that meets your requirements.

```javascript
const http = require('http');

const hostname = '127.0.0.1';
const port = 3000;

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.statusCode = 200;
  res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  res.end('Hello, World!\n');
});

server.listen(port, hostname, () => {
  console.log(`Server running at http://${hostname}:${port}/
`);
});
```

```
[INFO] The model has suggested a file change.
[?] Do you want to apply this change to server.js? (Y/n)
```

Here, Gemini CLI has identified that the code should be written to `server.js` and prompts you for confirmation. Press `Y` and then Enter.

**Step 3: Run the Application**

You now have a `server.js` file in your project directory. You can use the `!` prefix to run shell commands directly within Gemini CLI to start the server:

```
> !node server.js
```

You will see the output `Server running at http://127.0.0.1:3000/`. Now, open your browser to this address, or use the `curl` command in another terminal, and you will see the "Hello, World!" response.

Through this simple exercise, you have experienced the complete workflow from stating requirements, generating code, creating a file, to running a test. In the following chapters, we will explore more advanced features that will enable you to handle more complex development tasks.

Commit message:

docs: correct instruction for sending prompts in Chapter 3

en/part1-getting-started/chapter03-your-first-interactive-session.md, after:

# Chapter 3: Your First Interactive Session (REPL)

After successfully installing and configuring Gemini CLI, it's time to launch it and start your first AI programming conversation. This chapter will familiarize you with the core of Gemini CLI—the interactive session, also known as REPL (Read-Eval-Print Loop).

## Starting Interactive Mode

Interactive mode is the most commonly used and powerful feature of Gemini CLI. It provides a chat-like interface that allows you to have a continuous conversation with the Gemini model.

To start interactive mode, simply type the `gemini` command in your terminal:

```bash
gemini
```

After pressing Enter, you will see a welcome screen and a prompt `> ` waiting for your input. This indicates that Gemini CLI is ready to receive your instructions.

```
Welcome to Gemini CLI!

Ask me anything, or type /help for a list of commands.
> 
```

## Writing Your First Prompt

A "Prompt" is the instruction or question you give to Gemini CLI. A good prompt is key to getting a high-quality response. Let's start with a simple task.

After the `> ` prompt, type the following, and then press Enter to send it:

```
> Write a Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers.
```

For single-line prompts, a single press of the Enter key is all that's needed. If you need to write a multi-line prompt, you can paste the text directly or use `Shift+Enter` to add new lines before sending.
After sending the prompt, Gemini CLI will connect to the Gemini model for processing, and you will soon see a response similar to the one below.

## Understanding Gemini CLI's Responses and Output

The response from Gemini CLI typically includes text and code generated by the AI. For our prompt above, the response might look like this:

```
Of course, here is a simple Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers:

```python
def add_numbers(a, b):
  """
  This function takes two numbers as input and returns their sum.
  """
  return a + b

# Example usage
result = add_numbers(5, 3)
print(f"The sum is: {result}")
```

This response clearly shows several key parts:
*   **Explanatory Text:** The AI first explains what it is about to do in natural language.
*   **Code Block:** The code is presented in a formatted block with syntax highlighting, making it easy to read and copy.
*   **Example:** It often includes a simple usage example to show you how to call the generated code.

## Non-Interactive Mode

Besides the interactive REPL, Gemini CLI also supports a non-interactive mode. This is useful when you want a quick answer without entering a full session, and it's also convenient for use in scripts.

You can use the `-p` (or `--prompt`) parameter along with your prompt.

```bash
gemini -p "Write a Python function to calculate the sum of two numbers."
```

After executing this command, Gemini CLI will print the response directly in the terminal and then exit, without entering interactive mode.

## Hands-on Exercise: Generating a Simple "Hello, World!" Application

Now, let's experience the power of Gemini CLI with a more practical development example. We will have it create a simple Node.js "Hello, World!" web server for us.

**Step 1: State Our Requirements**

In the Gemini CLI interactive session, enter the following prompt:

```
> I need a simple web server written in Node.js.
> It should listen for requests on port 3000.
> When a request is received, it should return "Hello, World!".
> Please put all the code in a file named `server.js`.
```

**Step 2: Review and Apply the AI-Generated Code**

Gemini CLI will understand your multi-line instructions and generate the corresponding code. It will even recognize that you want to create a file and ask for your confirmation.

```
Okay, here is the Node.js web server code that meets your requirements.

```javascript
const http = require('http');

const hostname = '127.0.0.1';
const port = 3000;

const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.statusCode = 200;
  res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  res.end('Hello, World!\n');
});

server.listen(port, hostname, () => {
  console.log(`Server running at http://${hostname}:${port}/
`);
});
```

```
[INFO] The model has suggested a file change.
[?] Do you want to apply this change to server.js? (Y/n)
```

Here, Gemini CLI has identified that the code should be written to `server.js` and prompts you for confirmation. Press `Y` and then Enter.

**Step 3: Run the Application**

You now have a `server.js` file in your project directory. You can use the `!` prefix to run shell commands directly within Gemini CLI to start the server:

```
> !node server.js
```

You will see the output `Server running at http://127.0.0.1:3000/`. Now, open your browser to this address, or use the `curl` command in another terminal, and you will see the "Hello, World!" response.

Through this simple exercise, you have experienced the complete workflow from stating requirements, generating code, creating a file, to running a test. In the following chapters, we will explore more advanced features that will enable you to handle more complex development tasks.
